The Nothing Mirror

Story by
Julian Von Plato
Thabo Rametsi
Dylan Von Plato

written by
Letuka Makoko


1. INT. INTERROGATION ROOM - NIGHT

Two men sit at a sturdy steel table across from each other in a dimly lit room. The walls are bare, foreboding, an infinite void. A single look around the room is enough to drop even the liveliest spirits. This is a space in which hope wouldn't dare tread.

Detective Lance Mullen (52), A grizzled veteran detective in the Police Force, is sat reclining in his chair with his hands fidgeting under the table, right foot tapping uncontrollably while staring intently at Oscar Phiri (37) As if waiting for him to make even the slightest movement before pouncing on him. Internally he is a raging furnace. Externally, a lion silently stalking his prey. Nothing but a Steel table with a single file, a pad, and a pen between them.

Oscar, is staring right back at him, unflinching, unmoved. His expression unreadable. His posture, laid back. We see his hands under the table restrained by handcuffs. Tension fills the already suffocating atmosphere generated by this mausoleum-like room.

The silence is broken when the door cracks open and Inspector Naude (49) steps in coyly. Her expression fearful, concerned but determined.

                    INSPT. NAUDE
          Lance, the captain's called me in
          to take ove-

Without moving his eyes off Oscar, Lance snaps back at her with a stern, but low voice.

                    LANCE
          --Fuck Off.

A shiver courses Naude's back and she steps back, before finding her resolve again and stepping forward.

                    INSPT. NAUDE
          Ok, but give it to me Lance. I know
          you're not careless enough to not
          have another one on you.

Lance turns his head towards her slowly. He looks at her with the same expression Oscar has lived with for the past 13 minutes. Naude swallows hard as she looks at Lance and sees a sight she has become increasingly familiar with in her 23 years in the force. The cold, blank eyes of a man who has willingly relinquished his soul.

Without a word, he reaches behind his back and hands her his service pistol, coldly, calmly.

                    LANCE
          Don't need it.

The slightest smirk flashes across Oscars lips upon hearing those words. Both Lance and Naude miss it as he wipes it from his face as quickly as he put it on. Replacing it instead with the mask he had on before Naude's intrusion.

She receives the gun from Lance and begins to retreat backwards towards the door, before an idea to make a final attempt at reaching him interrupts her.

                    INSPT. NAUDE
          Lance...please--

                    LANCE
              (unflinching)
          Fuck. Off.

Naude, defeated, exits the room.

Lance opens the file, then takes his phone out of his jacket pocket, sets a timer on it. He then opens a Voice Recording app before placing it on the table. He grabs the pen and begins scribbling away on the pad.

Oscar looks at him silently, as if studying him. Still quiet, still unmoved, seemingly unbothered by neither the overwhelming bloodlust radiating from Lance, nor the eerie air in the room. Instead he feels peaceful, as if at home.

Lance finishes his note and looks up at Oscar who has yet to move a muscle. The quintessential picture of calm.

                    LANCE (CONT'D)
          The date is August 4th 2025,
          01:13am. Detective Lance Mullen,
          9013-BA, Capricorn Unit. Suspect in
          custody is Oscar Phiri
          8806215286082. Apprehended at
          23:13pm, August 3rd at the scene in
          question. Processed at Douglasdale
          Police Station by Lieutenant
          Mavimbela. Observer and Reserve are
          Captain Phineas Tsotetsi and
          Inspector Beverly Naude.
          Respectively.

He gathers himself with a quick breath as if pushing back a raging storm within as he does so.


2. INT. INTERROGATION ROOM - NIGHT

Lance begins his interrogation with a low stern voice. Doing everything in his power to remain professional.

                    LANCE
          What time did you arrive at 3
          Fisant Avenue On the evening of the
          3rd of August 2025 Mr. Phiri.

                    OSCAR
              (smiling)
          Mr. even. Whew, that must be tough.

Lance swallows hard, clearly triggered by those callous words, but he quickly gathers himself.

                    LANCE
              (menacingly but calm)
          Let me try again. What time did you
          arrive at 3 Fisant Avenue on the
          evening of the 3rd of August 2025?

Oscar stares him dead in the eye for a moment, before calmly responding.

                    OSCAR
          Detective, if you had to guess,
          what is the difference between me
          and you?

Lance stares back at him. Seemingly unnerved by the response. This clearly not his first rodeo.

                    LANCE
          Mr. Phiri, it would benefit you
          greatly to answer my questions, as
          quickly and as honestly as
          possible. This doesn't have to take
          time, this doesn't have to be
          difficult.

                    OSCAR
          Oh but nothing is ever easy is it
          detective? At least not for most of
          us. For a lot of us, difficulty is
          all there is.

Lance stares into Oscar's eyes for what seems like an eternity. Then pushes his chair back as he stands calmly walking towards the door and locking it. Oscar still unmoved chuckles. Pointing towards the only window into this grave spectacle, a double-sided glass in the interrogation room, as Lance takes his seat again.

                    OSCAR (CONT'D)
          In the movies, there are people
          watching behind that window. And
          when the detective begins to
          assault the suspect they see it,
          and are what you guys call
          witnesses am I right? Is that the
          case here? I thought I heard you
          mention observers earlier?

                    LANCE
          Let's say they are there? How long
          do you think it would take them to
          get in here and save you?

                    OSCAR
          Save me? Do you think there's
          salvation for people like us
          detective?

                    LANCE
          Not when I'm involved typically.

Oscar laughs, Lance is serious. Chillingly so.

                    OSCAR
          I didn't think so detective. You
          don't strike me as someone who
          saves people.

His expression hardens as he stares back at Lance. It's an ominous stare off once again.

Lance gathers himself once more as he takes a breath. Looks at the window as if to tell whoever is on the other side that he is in full control of himself. Before resuming his interrogation.

                    LANCE
          What did you want there? And before
          you get smart with me again, I know
          it wasn't to steal anything. You
          didn't touch a single item in the
          house.
              (more stern, gritting his
               teeth)
          Who sent you to kill...to kill her?

LANCE is on the verge of tears, or murder as he utters the words.

                    OSCAR
              (Glaring back at Lance)
          Did you know her detective?

The question is fuel to an already raging forest fire within Lance, He is barely holding himself together. Oscar sees the flames behind his eyes and doesn't back down. Goading him with his own flame of rage. Mirroring Lance.

Lance doesn't answer, instead staring at the volcano about to erupt in front of him with a look comprised of Pity and resentment. Lance breathes heavily, every atom dedicated to holding himself back from leaping across the table and pummeling Oscar beneath the cold concrete floor of the lifeless shell they are both in.

                    INSPT. NAUDE (V.O)
          Lance, recess. Captain's order.

Lance, now seething, holds his stare for a moment longer. Then stands and makes for the door. Unlocking and opening it, all while looking back at Oscar, who now looks as innocent as a dove sitting calmly in his chair. He walks out of the room. And the door slams shut.

Oscar looks at the window, and a knowing smile is drawn slowly across his face. Seemingly satisfied with himself.


3. INT. INTERROGATION ROOM - NIGHT (SOME TIME LATER)

Lance re-enters the room. His eyes swollen. His look more disheveled, as if he wept a few moments ago. A bottle of water in hand. He speaks to an unseen figure on the other side of the door.

                    LANCE
          Yeah, I'm good. Let's get it over
          with. I can handle it.

He nods, closes the door, and sits back down across from a man he wants nothing more than to wipe from the face of the earth.

                    OSCAR
          Oh, I was starting to feel a little
          lonely in here. This room,
          it's...it's terrifying, but
          somehow...familiar. Do you ever get
          the sense you've seen someone or
          some place before detective

He shoots a serious look at him. As if hinting at something. Lance doesn't take the bait. He simply picks his phone up, and restarts the timer and recording app.

                    LANCE
          I've asked you two questions, both
          of which I still want answers for.

                    OSCAR
          I counted three questions, but I'll
          answer the first two as you wish. I
          arrived there at 20:45. Had a
          lovely conversation with her. She
          was, a beautiful soul. Showed me
          around the house. Told me about her
          daughter at UCT, and her son who
          passed away some years back.
          Tragic, she said he didn't get
          along with his dad much, before
          OD'ing.

LANCE winces, clearly nerve struck by Oscar's words. He swallows hard and clenches his fist. Tears of anger welling up. His skin burning red. Oscar sees this and smirks silently before continuing.

                    OSCAR (CONT'D)
          I Asked her to call the police
          precisely an hour and 15 minutes
          before they arrived. Sad really the
          state of of the law enforcement in
          this country. I wonder if she'd
          still be alive if they got there on
          time.

Every word like a dagger through Lance's heart. He is fighting with every fiber of his being to keep it together.

                    OSCAR (CONT'D)
          Which brings me to the next
          question, I Asked her specifically
          to call you detective.

Lance looks up sharply, wondering if he heard correctly.

                    OSCAR (CONT'D)
          She only called the other guys
          because you didn't answer. She was
          adamant that you wouldn't, I didn't
          believe her but alas. I was there
          to kill your wife detective.

Lance trembles, his anger reaching fever pitch. He throws his head in his hands, tearing up. Before barely recollecting himself to ask the one question spinning in his mind at this revelation.

                    LANCE
          Who the fuck are you?

Oscar doesn't answer, instead staring at the volcano about to erupt in front of him with a look comprised of Pity and resentment. Lance breathes heavily, every atom dedicated to holding himself back from leaping across the table and pummeling Oscar beneath the cold concrete floor of the lifeless shell they are both in.

                    LANCE (CONT'D)
          I said, who the fuck are you? Who
          sent you?

                    OSCAR
              (deadpan)
          Detective. If you answer just three
          questions I have, I suspect you'll
          get the answers you're looking for
          as well.

Lance fists clenched, teeth grinding, tears in his eyes stands and walks around the table towards Oscar, who remains perfectly calm. As he reaches Oscar ready to pounce, hard knocking is heard at the door that jolts him out of his intent.

                    INSPT. NAUDE (V.O.)
          LANCE! LANCE! recess! Fuck Lance! I
          knew this was a bad idea , Captain,
          pull him out of there!

Lance looks towards the window. Still in pain, his heart racing, anger coursing through his whole being. He is fighting himself fiercely.

                    LANCE
          I'm good, I'm good. Please, don't
          take this away from me captain. I
          need answers.

He retreats back into his chair. Staving off the burning desire to attack.

                    LANCE (CONT'D)
              (To Oscar)
          What is your question?

                    OSCAR
              (Mockingly)
          Thank you detective. You did say
          this doesn't have to be hard
          correct?
          First question: Do you remember
          where you were on this exact day 3
          years ago?

Lance Is taken aback not by the question itself, but the manner and nerve of the delivery. He looks at the window and begins laughing coldly. Sarcastically before opening his water bottle and take a long swig.


4. INT. INTERROGATION ROOM - NIGHT

                    LANCE
              (Laughing through the
               pain)
          Is this a fucken joke to you? Who
          the fuck do you think you are
          interrogating me? Do you know what
          the hell is happening to you right
          now?

                    OSCAR
          Detective that's not an answer. Do
          you want to know why I did it or
          not?

Lance glares at him, but composes himself and plays along.

                    LANCE
          Who the fuck are you? How do you
          know me.

                    OSCAR
              (Sighs)
          We're not getting anywhere, are we
          detective. It seems we are both not
          good at answering questions. We are
          not so different me and you, right?

                    LANCE
          You're nothing. Nothing at all. And
          if I do nothing to you right this
          minute. Believe me you wont last
          long your cell. I'll make sure of
          that. I could kill you now and
          forget your face by the time the
          sun comes out. That's the
          difference. You're nothing, and
          you're nothing like me.

                    OSCAR
          I see. Nothing. That's what we are
          to you.
              (sighs)
          Here I was hoping you were the type
          to feel something at the very
          least. But I see now , I was a
          dumb-ass to hold on to hope.
              (deflated)
          I'm losing the appetite to continue
          our game now. Maybe it really was
          all for nothing.

Lance loses it.

                    LANCE
          You piece of shit! Don't tell me my
          wife died for fucken nothing! I
          swear I'll end this myself! You
          think this is a fucken game!?

                    OSCAR
          You did say I am nothing. Nothing
          is, as nothing does. You, the big
          something. Me, the small nothing.
          Nothing lost, nothing gained. Mandy
          died for nothing.

Lance's fury is palpable. He looks to unleash it

                    LANCE
          Who the fuck sent you, you
          worthless piece of--

Before he completes his sentence Oscar Leaps up and snarls right back at Lance getting in his face. For the first time the peaceful murderer that sat there and spoke calmly and softly Looks like the beast of revelations! Fierce, ferocious, a direct mirror of Lance's anger. Lance is shook. For the first time, he no longer feels like the bigger something.

                    OSCAR
          --Answer my fucken question!
              (breathes heavily)

Another series of hard knocks on the door. To quell the fire in the room. Both men are staring each other off. Ignoring them. Lance attempting to hide his fear. Oscar backs off and once again assumes the role of subservience and calm, he sits back down. The knocks stop.


5. INT. INTERROGATION ROOM - NIGHT

Lance not so sure exactly who he is looking at anymore, sits back down.

                    OSCAR
          Do you remember what you did on
          this exact date, 3 years ago?
          That's also the night your son died
          no?

Lance is shook by those words, he quickly glances at the window, stealing a look, as if trying to figure out if they heard Oscar. Then he quickly catches himself. But it's too late, Oscar is on to him.

                    LANCE
          What the fuck are you talking about
          laaitie. You have no idea what the
          hell you're saying.

                    OSCAR
          But you do detective and that's the
          point. When your wife told me that
          Kevin didn't fuck with you I didn't
          have to wonder why, I mean a junkie
          and a cop. Odd couple right?

Lance is shaking, his emotions a murky cocktail of fear, anger and regret. Oscar clocks this and presses on.

                    OSCAR (CONT'D)
          Oh, so you can feel something. Is
          that why you did it? I would've
          done the same thing.

Oscar is now firmly inside Lance's head. He no longer knows where or who he is, just that the bottled up emotions have been forced to the surface. And it's all too much. Even for a vet like him.

                    LANCE
          Fucken right! I did fucken kill the
          asshole who gave my boy those
          drugs, and I'd do it a million
          times over. Just what do you think
          I'll do to the man who killed my
          wife too now, the only thing I had
          left in this world. Now I have
          nothing, and nothing to lose.

He glares at Oscar and snarls again.

                    OSCAR
          You're free now, you're welcome.
          You're like me. Nothing. I told you
          there's not much between us. I was
          like you that night, when you took
          away the only person I had left in
          this world, in much the same way I
          just did your wife.

Lance is stopped cold by the weight of realization. Those words could only come from one who knows a secret he kept hidden from everyone including the people on the other side of the glass. He stops snarling as his expression softens, fear rises. His emotions a cocktail no more. He is a deer in the headlights. He swallows hard as he looks at Oscar once more.

                    LANCE
          Say another word.

Oscar slowly turns his head towards the window. As we see through his POV, We see the reflection of two men whose lives are about to take a turn. But Oscar seems to stare straight through it, as if seeing the very faces behind the two-way glass. He turns back to Lance. A Tear streams from his eye.

                    OSCAR
          Why did you choose my father? He
          was home, alone. Innocent.

                    LANCE
          Shut up. Shut the fuck up!

He stands once more and points a raging finger at Oscar.

                    OSCAR
          You didn't even give him a chance.
          I let your wife reach for her phone
          at least. I wanted to give you
          something you didn't give me. A
          chance to say goodbye.

                    LANCE
          I said shut your fucken mouth!

                    OSCAR
          You needed someone to take the fall
          for killing Kevin's dealer. So you
          grabbed the nearest nothing you
          could find. He was sitting on the
          porch, he wouldn't have said
          nothing about what he saw you do
          that night.
          He was never the type to bother
          anyone. He was waiting for me.
          Patiently.

Lance is triggered he dashes towards Lance Pen in hand preparing to stab him, Lance expertly uses his handcuffs to turn the tables on Lance as he doges and flips Lance, Using the handcuffs as a means to choke him. When Lance is firmly under his control. HE walks towards the window. Holding lance right up against it as he struggles to breathe. There are panicked knocks on the door attempting to break it down to reach them. But Oscar calmly and coldly looks at the glass while draining the life out of Lance. Tears streaming from his eyes.

                    OSCAR (CONT'D)
              (To the people on the
               other side of the glass)
          You knew didn't you. His story
          didn't add up. But you didn't dig.
          You knew the man he pinned that
          death on was innocent. And you did
          nothing, because His son had died.
          You let him have his moment.
          Because we are nothing to you too.

Lance is struggling for air, his life being drained coldly.

                    OSCAR (CONT'D)
          Life, in a way is kind of like this
          Glass, it shows you everything and
          nothing at the same time.

The frantic knocks on the door continue. Bang! Bang!

                    OSCAR (CONT'D)
          You see people, but you see
          nothing. So you do nothing, while
          everything happens, good and bad.
          We're the same me and Lance. Yet
          we're nothing alike.

Lance struggles faintly, his strength draining away as he breathes his last.

                    OSCAR (CONT'D)
          Life...It's the nothing mirror.


Fade to black

END.
